I want you to replace the current highlight behavior so that during recitation the app does not highlight the whole verse and does not highlight the whole word with a box.

Instead, I want this behavior:

Main requirement
When a reciter is reciting an ayah:

highlight the characters of the exact word currently being recited by changing their text color,

do not draw a background box around the word,

do not highlight the whole ayah,

do not highlight neighboring words early,

do not repeat the first word of the ayah,

do not lag behind the audio,

and make sure the highlight is strictly synchronized with the audio.

This should feel like true word-in-a-line recitation tracking, not block highlighting. Word-by-word Quran audio features are a recognized reading/listening pattern, and audio-text sync systems generally rely on word-level timing data rather than broad paragraph or line-level highlighting.

First step: inspect the existing app
Before implementing anything:

Inspect the current codebase.

Identify how Quran audio is loaded and played.

Identify how ayah highlighting is currently done.

Identify whether word-level timing data already exists in the app.

Identify how Arabic text is rendered and segmented.

Identify the cleanest way to switch from verse/box highlighting to character-level color highlighting.

Do not rebuild the app from scratch.
Do not redesign unrelated Quran screens.
Do not break audio controls, Tajweed rendering, translation, bookmarks, or reading mode.
Make precise, minimal, production-quality changes only. Replit works best for existing apps when the prompt asks for focused changes with clear boundaries.

Target behavior
Implement a new audio-sync text renderer with these rules:

1. Character-level visual highlight
The currently recited word should be highlighted by changing the text color of its letters/characters only.

No boxed background.

No pill chip.

No large underline unless used as a subtle optional enhancement.

The highlight color should integrate with the current app theme and remain readable in light and dark mode.

2. Strict sync with audio
Highlight should advance according to word-level timing, not guessed intervals.

The active word should update in sync with the currently playing recitation time.

Seeking, pausing, resuming, changing playback speed, or switching reciters must keep the sync correct.

On seek, recompute the current active word immediately.

On pause, freeze highlight exactly where playback stops.

On resume, continue from the correct word without drifting.

Precise word sync requires time-coded word boundaries or equivalent alignment data, and text-sync systems generally recommend explicit start/end timing per word for reliable highlighting.

3. No repeated first word of ayah
There is a bug or risk where the first word of the ayah may repeat or highlight twice.

I want you to:

inspect current segmentation/indexing logic,

find and eliminate the cause of first-word duplication,

make sure the first word appears once and is highlighted once,

ensure the renderer and timing map both use the same indexing model.

4. No lagging
I want this to feel immediate and tight.

Please reduce or eliminate lag by:

avoiding slow polling if a more accurate timing method is possible,

using efficient playback time tracking,

preloading or caching timing data,

minimizing rerenders,

and updating only the affected word spans instead of rerendering the whole ayah tree if possible.

5. No whole-word box
Current behavior may use box or background highlight styles.

Remove that for the recitation-follow feature and replace it with:

text color change only,

optionally subtle font-weight change if it improves clarity,

but no intrusive block UI.

Audio timing data requirement
Please determine whether the app already has word-level timestamps.

If word-level timestamps already exist:

use them.

If the app only has ayah-level timing:

do not fake precise word sync by evenly splitting ayah duration across words unless there is absolutely no alternative,

instead create the correct architecture for word-level timing support,

and clearly document what timing source is required.

If a reliable word-level timing dataset/API is available in the current app stack, integrate it cleanly. Word-by-word sync depends on real alignment data to stay accurate and avoid visible drift.

Rendering requirements
The Quran text renderer must support:

Arabic RTL rendering,

correct shaping and harakat display,

clean word segmentation,

optional coexistence with Tajweed color logic,

and audio-active highlighting on top of normal text rendering.

Implementation guidance:

segment the ayah into words using the app’s canonical Quran text data,

render each word in a span with a stable ID or index,

when active, apply an active-recitation class that changes only the text color,

if needed, further segment characters only visually, but do not break Arabic shaping unnecessarily,

preserve Mushaf readability.

Important:

do not over-fragment Arabic text into many DOM nodes if that breaks ligatures or diacritics,

prefer the minimum segmentation needed to apply color correctly.

Tajweed compatibility
If Tajweed coloring already exists or is being added:

do not break it,

define a clear priority model for styles.

Suggested behavior:

base text style,

Tajweed color layer,

active recitation override layer.

When a word is actively being recited:

the active recitation color should override the base word color in a controlled way,

but the architecture should remain extensible in case you later want “active recitation + Tajweed tint” behavior.

State management requirements
Implement a proper sync state model, such as:

currentAyahId

currentWordIndex

currentPlaybackTime

timingDataLoaded

isPlaying

playbackRate

The active highlighted word must derive from playback state and timing data, not from brittle DOM logic.

Suggested data structures
ts
type WordTiming = {
  surahId: number;
  ayahId: number;
  wordIndex: number;
  startMs: number;
  endMs: number;
};

type ActiveRecitationState = {
  surahId: number | null;
  ayahId: number | null;
  wordIndex: number | null;
  currentTimeMs: number;
  isPlaying: boolean;
  playbackRate: number;
};

type QuranWordSegment = {
  surahId: number;
  ayahId: number;
  wordIndex: number;
  text: string;
};
Performance requirements
The implementation must be smooth and low-latency:

cache word timing data per ayah or per surah,

avoid full rerender of the whole screen on every audio tick,

memoize ayah/word segments,

only update the active word state when the active word actually changes,

avoid duplicating the first word during normalization/parsing,

support long surahs without UI jank.

UI requirements
Keep the UI consistent with the existing app:

same fonts,

same spacing,

same theme behavior,

same Surah page structure,

same reader style.

Only change the highlighting behavior and any supporting internal renderer logic needed for precise sync.

For the visual style of active recitation:

use a clean text color change,

no word box,

no large chip,

no disruptive animation,

readable in light and dark themes.

Edge cases to handle
Please handle these properly:

play from start of ayah,

play from middle of ayah,

seek backward,

seek forward,

pause/resume,

change reciter,

change playback speed,

audio buffering,

no timing data loaded yet,

last word of ayah,

transition from one ayah to the next,

first word of ayah should not double-render or double-highlight.

Debugging and validation
Add a temporary developer-friendly validation layer if useful:

log active ayah + word index changes,

compare audio current time against timing data boundaries,

add a debug mode that can show the current word index and timing window,

then keep this behind a dev flag or remove it after verification.

Testing requirements
Please verify all of the following:

active highlight follows the currently recited word accurately,

there is no full-ayah highlight anymore during recitation,

there is no word box highlight anymore,

first word of ayah is not repeated,

highlight does not visibly lag,

seeking preserves sync,

pause/resume preserves sync,

playback speed changes preserve sync,

ayah transitions preserve sync,

Arabic rendering still looks correct.

Implementation order
Please work in this order:

Inspect the current Quran audio and highlighting architecture.

Identify existing timing data availability.

Replace current ayah/boxed highlight logic with word-level active state.

Build character/text-color active highlight rendering.

Fix first-word duplication bug.

Optimize for low-latency updates.

Test all playback interactions and edge cases.

Document changed files and the timing model used.

Safety rules
Do not refactor unrelated screens.

Do not redesign the Quran section.

Do not break Tajweed, translation, reading view, or bookmarks.

Do not introduce fake word sync if real timing support is missing; instead build the correct structure and document the missing timing dependency.

If a major architecture change is required, explain it before doing it.

Final output required
When done, show me:

which files were changed,

how the word timing is sourced,

how active word sync is computed,

how you removed full-ayah and box highlighting,

how you fixed the repeated first-word issue,

and what was done to reduce lag.